once around the pades very nice little
star cluster visible in the Northern
Hemisphere and you can always find it
during the winter it's located on the
back of Taurus the Bull so you find the
vshape of the face of Taurus the Bull
the highes cluster with the bright star
older Baron in it and you can then just
look a little to the right and you'll
see this faint fuzzy patch in the sky
the darker your site the better you'll
see it um and it's uh very much sort of
better the better your uh conditions are
and if you have a pair of binoculars
then absolutely glorious the name
sometimes uh refers to the follower
being as this cluster is following the
larger group of the hedes and alabaran
across the
sky but we also call this group The
Seven Sisters named after the the uh
seven Vestal virgins in Greek
mythology but it turns up all over the
place back in Antiquity there's a record
this nebra dis Bronze Age artifact from
North Germany which contains pictures of
what looks like the sun and the moon but
also possibly the Seven Sisters Stars
mapped out there at the top there are
certainly seven of those blobs in a
little cluster not sure about that it's
not the quite the right shape and also
turned up on an Australian $1 bill back
in 2020 the pades were represented on
the back of this bill and this is uh in
accordance with an ancient Australian
indigenous tradition so it it's turned
up in all sorts of
cultures in terms of modern observations
it got itself into Charles messier's
catalog of annoying things that are not
comets Charles made a a business out of
identifying comets and became such an
expert in it that people kept sending
him observations of fuzzy blobs that
they spotted in the sky which of course
he knew all about once he'd worked out
what they were talking about and used to
have to write them letters to say no
I've already seen that one it's not a
comet So eventually just made himself a
list and published it and the pades got
itself on that list as item number 45
it's quite large two degrees of Sky it
covers in total if you look at it with
binoculars and you're sort of
encompassing all of the stars and that's
four times the diameter of the full moon
so this is quite a large extended object
absolutely hopeless looking at it with a
powerful telescope really because you
end up drilling right into the center
and just seeing a little bit of it and
it just looks like any other Starfield
but with a low power wide field of view
that you get with binoculars then it's
great and of course Galileo got there
first turned the telescope to the sky
back in 1609 and observed the pades and
spotted that they weren't just the Seven
Stars there he could map out about
40 but the the main ones are in this
little grouping and it looks like an
even smaller version of the big and
Little Dippers the tail was a bit short
um hasn't got a particularly long tail
the others have three stars in their
tail but uh this has one or possibly two
at the end there and then the sort of
Bowl shape in the middle so it always
looks like a micro Dipper if you want to
look at it that
way the brightest star of the lot is
atlas and that outshines the others by
nearly a whole magnitude or more um
we've got 3.7 as the magnitude of Atlas
and the others are 4.8 or lower and so
we have a little map of them you've got
Atlas at the left there next to the less
bright Leon Alan merope Electra and so
on around the grouping there and if your
eyesight's really good you could perhap
see eight or nine of these um if it's
not so good and you got a lot of light
interference that number drops to six
five or even four
sometimes nice little picture here the
bright thing in the middle of the screen
there that's Jupiter passing through
between the vshape of the hies cluster
with old darar in there at the bottom
and the pades at the top right um this
is called the Golden Gate of the
ecliptic it's where the ecliptic line
passes through Taurus between those two
star
groupings and correspondingly going the
other way we've got Comet Lovejoy
showing very green nucleus with a long
thin tail excellent photograph of the
Comet there passing by below the pades
grouping so what do we know about these
Stars well actually there's over a
thousand stars in the
cluster and it totals up to about 800
solar masses of material so a on average
just a little bit less than that of the
sun um all packed into an area the uh
diameter of the core of the cluster is
about eight light years but it goes out
to about 43 before you really run out of
stars and it's estimated that over half
the stars in the system are actually
double stars and that's not that
uncommon really uh most of the stars
that we see in the night sky turn out to
be double or multiple
systems now in terms of distance there's
been a bit of a controversy about this
it was originally estimated by Parallax
that it was about 430 light years away
and then hipparcos the satellite came
along and gave a distance of only 390 so
10% less um and that didn't seem right
and indeed it probably wasn't right
because more modern observations in
particular the guia uh satellite that's
up there has come out at
436 and uh other observations around 440
so we're pretty sure that that original
estimate of 430 wasn't that bad actually
and there's something wrong with the
hipparcos data and actually happened in
a number of cases so it wasn't just this
oneof that where hipparcos got it
wrong now those bright bluish colored
stars that we see are B type Stars they
have 14 of these powerful blue b type
stars in the pades that are giving off
most of the light and these are very hot
10 to 30,000 degrees Kelvin glowing in
this blue white color you can see it
very nicely in the image here
and these B type stars are rare and one
reason that they're rare is it's hard to
form giant stars that with this sort of
level of mass that they have to have um
up to about 15 times the mass of the Sun
in order for them to be this powerful
and nature finds it difficult to get
that amount of material together quick
enough before the star lights up and
it's uh power output then blows away any
more infalling
material um so they're rare for that
reason but they're also rare because
they don't hang about very long they
live fast and die young uh living uh
perhaps um 10 million 20 million years
this sort of level and then they're gone
um maybe a 100 million years for the
slightly smaller B type Stars
so you don't see very many because not
many are formed and they're not around
for long enough to really accumulate a
large number before they've died and
gone again so they live fast and die
young and when we look at the
distribution of stars we often plot them
on the herzsprung Russell diagram
plotting the temperature against the
power output and the temperature
corresponds to the color so you have the
red ones at the right hand side at 3000
then yellow then uh the white ones
up to about 10,000 and then the blue hot
ones at even higher uh temperatures than
that and so our B type stars are up in
that hot region and when you look at the
diagram of the pades you see that in
fact the distribution of stars along the
diagonal main sequence line the red line
where ordinary stars that are carrying
out hydrogen to helium Fusion in their
cores exist um and this is a measure of
their Mass so the low mass ones are at
the bottom right and the high mass ones
would be at the top left and what we
find is that we've got all of those from
um around about 11 or 12,000 degrees all
the way down that the uh graph there
sitting there happily burning away on
the main sequence but the ones that sort
of just over that are deviating away
from it they're turning off the main
sequence and this is them running out of
fuel becoming less efficient overall and
gradually turning into a a giant star
but they're not yet fully into the red
giant phase so they're just beginning to
turn off at that point in the sequence
and this is a clue to how old the pades
are you note there are none of the
really massive stars because those have
already died they've gone through life
cycle burnt their fuel and died and and
uh gone away if they were ever
formed and in fact if we compare what we
get when we look at the uh Herz sprung
Russell diagram for different clusters
rather than just for the whole Milky Way
on average you can see the effect of
this as a cluster ages the turnoff Point
gradually moves down the main sequence
to smaller and smaller smaller stars as
each level of size of
star has reached the end of its life
progressively so we've got the double
cluster in Perseus at the top there in
the with the pale blue line and NGC
2362 those are very young clusters they
have very very hot Stars still in
existence but just at the turnoff point
the pades is a little bit older and so
those stars have gone and the B type
stars are beginning to turn off the main
sequence as they age and run out of uh
their ability to fuse hydrogen in the
core and then we have M11 that's a
little bit older so the sort of slightly
whiter colored stars are running out of
fuel the higher D next and then we make
our way down
NGC uh 752 and m67 and then you've got
uh some other bits you can see M11 and
uh the Double cluster in Perseus there
already have some stars that are fully
into the red giant phase so uh you
you've got these very interesting
combinations and it's a good way of
being able to date the progression of
stars and clusters in terms of the
turnoff point on the main sequence tells
you how far down this gradation of age
mass and temperature the uh evolutionary
process has
[Music]
gone also in applies though we have a
number of failed Stars these Brown
dwarfs the missing link between giant
planets like Jupiter and the smallest
red dwarf stars um if you make a star
and it has less than seven and a half%
of the mass of our sun then it fails to
ignite nuclear fusion of hydrogen to
helium in the core it can't carry out
the first step of taking two protons
smashing them together it doesn't have
the temperature and the pressure to
overcome their Mutual positive charge
repulsion and so you don't get Fusion
kicking off so the star doesn't properly
light up you can get a few uh low energy
nuclear reactions a little bit of dyum
or lithium reactions can k off heating
the object a little bit for about a
million years there's not really enough
fuel to last much longer than that and
so you get these warm Brown dwarfs which
are not really stars but have a higher
temperature maybe of a few hundred up to
nearly a thousand degrees in some cases
um and so are considerably hotter than
things like Jupiter at the smaller end
of things where we think no nuclear
fusion at all has occurred um Jupiter I
think the temperature is something like
125 Kelvin so quite
cold anyway so about a quarter of the
population of objects that have been
located in the pades seem to be brown
dwarves and it wouldn't surprise me if
we find even more of those because
nature is very good at forming small
clumps of
objects now when you look at the pades
you see these uh D Dusty blue nebula
regions around some of the stars and
it's very tempting to think that these
are parts of the original nebula
reflecting the light back this blue
color is the blue from the Stars being
back scattered To Us by carbon Dust In
This Cloud of material so that's why it
seems to be brightest nearest the stars
because it's the reflection of the
Starlight from these clouds of material
but these are not the leftovers of the
birth nebula the nebula is too old for
that it's about 75 million years we can
tell by the the turnoff point on that HR
diagram and the uh age of the oldest
brightest stars these main ones that we
see so what's going on well the material
we think is just a cloud of unrelated
dirt and dust in the galaxy and the
pades cluster on its orbit round the
galaxy has just blundered through it and
so it's completely unrelated and the the
reason that we think this is that the
relative velocity measured by the
Doppler shift um method seeing how the
wavelength is blue or red shifted
according to the velocity towards or
away from us is different for the
overall collection of stars to that that
you see from the dust so they are moving
differently and relative to each other
so nothing to do with it at all well
we've thought about and we' thought
about Brown dwarfs what about planets
have we found any planets around any of
the stars in this cluster well no not
yet this is definitely something that
would be very interesting they would be
very young planets indeed we have found
an actual dust disc around one of the
stars in the cluster it's got that
catalog number there um and this dirty
dust ring around the star is about the
same size as the inner part of the solar
system from Mars inwards the terrestrial
planet Zone and it's possible that that
is where new rocky planets might be in
the process of formation this is only 75
million years old so it's entirely
possible that a planet formation takes
one or2 200 million years longer than
the formation of the star in the center
so uh watch this space we're definitely
interested in trying to locate planets
around some of these stars and validate
the ideas of Planet formation and I'm
just going to end with a lovely
photograph that just shows how much of
that dust and dirt there is around in
that part of the Galaxy because this
wide area view here shows a little bit
of the California nebula down at the
bottom left hand corner the red bit
there the pink bit um another star
cluster and the pades punching through
that dirt and dust that it's just
happened to blunder into to on its
Journey around the
Galaxy so thanks very much for listening
that was once around the pades and we'll
be back uh with more videos on these
individual astronomical objects as we go
along thanks a lot